hey this is fresh tall Walker consider a
large circle from which for smaller
circles have been removed each of the
smaller circles passes through the
center of the large circle and touches
the boundary of the large circle the
smaller circles are in the north east
south and west positions if these four
smaller circles are removed from the
large circle what is the area that
remains in other words what is the area
of the shaded region in the following
diagram which is the area of the region
between the large circle and the
boundary of these four smaller circles
the large circles diameter equals 84
this problem was asked to primary school
students in Singapore can you figure it
out give this prom a try and when you're
ready keep watching the video for the
solution so this problem can be solved
in many different methods and in this
video I'm going to present three of them
in the first method we're going to
construct a large square by connecting
the points where exactly two of the
circles intersect what's useful about
this square is that it's going to cover
up the regions in which these circles
overlap so we can now calculate the area
that we need to remove by considering
the areas of five different shapes which
do not overlap in particular the shaded
area is equal to the area of the large
circle minus the area of the square
minus the area of four semi circles the
large circle has a diameter of 84 and
each of the small circles has a diameter
that's half as long so it's 42 the
square has a side that's equal to the
diameter of the semicircle so its side
is equal to
- a circle has an area PI R squared and
a square has an area of s squared the
four semi circles are equal to two
circles so we can now substitute in the
dimensions of each of these shapes and
we end up with an expression for the
area of the shaded region the answer
will be 880 - pi - 1764 which is
approximately one thousand and six point
eight eight five so this method is nice
because we don't have to evaluate the
region in which two of the smaller
circles overlap in the next method we'll
go ahead and do that explicitly what
we'll do is we'll consider this square
we'll connect the center of one of the
smaller circles to the points in which
the two circles intersect two adjacent
circles intersect so now the area where
these two circles intersect can be found
as follows this will actually be equal
to the area of two of these quarter
circles from each of these smaller
squares minus the area of this square so
to show you where these two quarter
circles come from I'm going to separate
them so now you can see where that
overlapping region comes from now each
quarter circle has an area of PI R
squared over 4 and the square has an
area of s squared this square has a side
length of 21 because it's equal to the
radius of one of the smaller circles we
can now substitute in these dimensions
and then simplify our expression so we
get the area of overlap between two
adjacent circles is equal to 220 point 5
PI minus 441 so how's this going to help
us solve the problem that we need well
we want to know the area of the region
we've removed so this will be equal to
the area of the
for smaller circles and then we have
four of these overlapping regions so we
don't want to over count the area that
we're removing so we're going to have to
add back these overlapping regions in
other words we have the area of the
shaded region is equal to the area of
the large circle minus the area of four
of the smaller circles and then we add
back in four of these overlapping
regions to make sure we're not double
counting the area that we're removing so
we substitute in the formulas for these
areas and the dimensions and then what
we end up it's actually kind of
interesting you can see the large circle
actually has an area that's equal to
four of the smaller circles so the area
of the shaded region is actually equal
to the area of these four overlapping
regions between two of the smaller
circles this is 880 - pi - 1764 or
approximately a thousand and 6.85 so
while this method was a little more
complicated we actually learned a couple
of things we didn't learn from the first
method so I'm now going to present one
more way to calculate the area between
two of the overlapping circles I'll draw
in an isosceles right triangle in one of
the smaller circles this divides the
overlapping region between an upper and
a lower region I'm going to move the
lower region from inside the triangle to
outside the triangle and now what we
have is that the area of the overlapping
region between two circles is equal to
the area of the semicircle minus the
area of the isosceles right triangle the
area of the semicircle is PI R squared
over two and the area of the triangle is
equal to its base times its height
divided by two the triangle has a height
that's equal to the radius of the
semicircle which is 21 and its base is
equal to the diameter of the smaller
circle which is 42 so we can now
substitute in these dimensions and then
simplify to get that the area of the
overlap between two of the smaller
circles is again 220 point five
- 441 we then perceived just as we did
in the second part of method - where we
calculate the shaded region by
subtracting out from the large circle
for the smaller circles and then adding
back in or these overlapping regions
we've already calculated each of these
so now we can get to the exactly the
same answer of 882 PI - 1764 which is
approximately one thousand and six point
eight eight five did you figure it out
thanks for watching this video please
subscribe to my channel I make videos on
math and game theory you can catch me on
my blog mind your decisions which you
can follow on Facebook Google+ and
patreon you can catch me on social media
at pressure Locker and if you liked this
video please check out my books there
are links in the video description